---
author: Mahmood Mamdani
date: Jan 2019
title: Decolonization, the Disciplines and the University
---

I.  **Focus and Themes**

*The institutional form* of the modern African university derives from
the colonial modern; the inspiration did not come from pre-colonial
institutions. The model was a discipline-based, gated, community with a
distinction between clearly defined groups (administrators, academics
and fee-paying students). Its birthplace was the University of Humbolt
in Berlin, a new type of university designed in the aftermath of
Germany's defeat by France in 1810. Over the next century, this
innovation spread to much of Europe, then the United States and from
there to the rest of the world.

Not only the institutional form but *the intellectual content* of modern
social sciences and humanities is also a product of the Enlightenment
experience in Europe. The European experience was the raw material from
which was forged *the category human*. However abstract, this category
drew meaning from actual struggles within and outside Europe.
Internally, the notion of human was an alternative to that of the
Christian. It was a Renaissance response to Church orthodoxy. The
intellectuals of Renaissance Europe looked to anchor their vision in a
history older than that of Christianity. They found this in pagan Greece
and imperial Rome, and self-consciously crafted these into a
foundational legacy for Europe. Externally, it was a response to an
entirely different set of circumstances -- not the changing vision of a
self-reflexive and self-revolutionizing Europe but of a self-assertive
Europe, reaching out, expanding, in a move that sought first to conquer
the world, starting with the New World, then Asia and finally Africa,
and then to transform and 'civilize' this world in its own image. This
dual origin made for a contradictory legacy. The modern European
university was a site for the study of the human. In their universal
reach for the human, the humanities and the social sciences, both
proclaimed the oneness of humanity and defined that oneness from a very
European vantage point, as a sameness. We may find and study great
examples of institutions of learning in the African world before
European conquest -- in Timbuktu, Cairo[^1], Tunis, Alexandria -- but
these did not shape the contemporary African university, whether
colonial or post-colonial. The decisive influence was the European
university.

The African university began as a colonial project -- a top-down
modernist project whose ambition was the conquest of society. The
university was in the frontline of the colonial 'civilizing mission.'
Properly understood, this 'civilizing mission' was the precursor, the
original edition of the 'one-size-fits-all' project that we associate
with Structural Adjustment Programs designed by the IMF and the World
Bank in the 1980s. Its ambition was to create universal scholars, men
and women who stood for excellence, regardless of context, and who would
serve as the vanguard of the 'civilizing mission' without reservation,
or remorse.

The first critical reflection on this colonial project took place in the
nationalist movement. From the ranks of the nationalist movement emerged
a different kind of intellectual, the public intellectual. If the
hallmark of the global scholar was *excellence*, that of the public
intellectual was *relevance*. Excellence was said to be universal,
measured without regard to context; relevance, however, was necessarily
contextual, place-specific.

The contest between the two unfolded at two very different campuses East
Africa. *Makerere University*, established in 1922, was the paradigmatic
colonial university. *The University of Dar-es-Salaam*, established at
independence in 1963, would soon emerge as the flag-bearer of
anti-colonial nationalism. They stood for two contrasting projects: the
colonial university as the turf of the universal scholar and the
nationalist university as home of the public intellectual.

The different visions were articulated by two different academics: Ali
Mazrui and Walter Rodney. Mazrui called for a university true to its
classical vision, as the home of the scholar "fascinated by ideas";
Rodney saw the university as the home of the public intellectual, a
committed intellectual located in his or her time and place, and deeply
engaged with the wider society.[^2] One moral of the story I want to
tell is that we resist the temptation to dismiss one side and embrace
the other. However compelling, these contrasting visions were anchored
in two equally one-sided notions of higher education: relevance and
excellence. At the same time, each contained something of value. Rather
than choose between them, I suggest we identify the kernel of value in
each through a dialectical approach.

Does place matter, as Walter Rodney claimed? Or do ideas matter,
regardless of place, as Mazrui insisted? Obviously, place matters. If
universities could be divorced from politics, if knowledge production
can be immune from power relations, then place would not matter. But
that is not the case. At the same time, ideas also do matter. If they
did not, why have a university at all? This is to say that politics is
not all.

The debate began at Makerere University in the early 60s, on the eve of
state independence. The two sides to the debate lined up on familiar
ground -- one side mobilized in defense of academic freedom, the other
called for justice. The first round of change produced resounding
victories for the broad nationalist camp which called for limiting the
autonomy of the university, and of the faculty in particular, so as to
put an end to racial privilege. They said the university should be
national not only in name but also in appearance. To undermine the
disciplinary nationalism and institutional autonomy which propped up the
authority of the expatriate staff would not be possible without a strong
role for the independent state in higher education. Dismissing academic
freedom as a code word in defense of the status quo, they called for
state intervention in the name of justice. It did not take long for the
terms of the debate to change, and dramatically so. With the emergence
of the single party regime, the university turned into an oasis where
the practice of academic freedom allowed free political speech and a
critique of the new order. Instead of a defense of racial privilege as
at independence, many began to rethink academic freedom as the cutting
edge of a critique of nationalist power.

It is in this context that Rajat Neogy[^3] founded *Transition*, a cross
between a journal and a magazine, one in which public intellectuals
wrote for a public that included both the gown and the town. Those who
wrote in it included writers like James Baldwin, Langston Hughes, Nadime
Gordimer, and Chinua Achebe, and politicians like Mwalimu Nyerere and
Tom Mboya. In the main, however, *Transition* made a possible a regional
conversation. Paul Theroux wrote 'Tarzan was an expatriate', an
understanding of Tarzan and Jane as the first expatriates.[^4] Ali
Mazrui wrote 'Nkrumah, The Leninist Czar,' an essay on authoritarianism
with a socialist tilt and 'Tanzaphilia.' of which I will have more to
say. In this latter essay, Mazrui contrasted an apparent 'ideological
orientation' with a deeper epistemological reality that he called 'mode
of reasoning.'

Compared to intellectual acculturation, ideological orientation is both
superficial and changeable: "To be in favor of this country or that, to
be attracted by this system of values rather than that, all are forms of
ideological conversion. And under a strong impulse one can change one's
creed. But it is much more difficult to change the process of reasoning
which one acquires from one's total educational background. ... After
all, French Marxists are still French in their intellectual style.
Ideologically, they may have a lot in common with Communist Chinese or
communist North Koreans. But in style of reasoning and the idiom of his
thought, a French Marxist has more in common with a French liberal than
with fellow communists in China and Korea. And that is why a French
intellectual who is a Marxist can more easily cease to be a Marxist than
he can cease to be a French intellectual." The year was 1967. If Mazrui
evokes Foucault, let us keep in mind that Foucault would write about
"discursive formations" in *The Archaeology of Knowledge* two years
later, in 1969.

**The Project**

This project is the outcome of an ongoing reflection at the outset of
the MPhil / PhD program at Makerere Institute of Social Research,
Makerere University. The MISR project has gone through a six year
reflection based on the question: what should be the mission of the
university in a post-colonial context and how should this mission be
reflected in the curriculum. We seek not to introduce a separate field
of study -- decolonization -- but to think of decolonization as a
methodological imperative, a perspective in which to bathe, rethink and
reshape all intellectual endeavors in the study of the humanities.

We now seek to expand what has hitherto been a single institution effort
into a larger and comparative reflection, one that involves research,
writing and curriculum development, involving the following
institutions, under the intellectual guidance of particular individuals:

-   The Institute of African Studies, University of Ghana (Professor
    Dzodzi Tsikata)

-   CAMES, American University of Beirut (Professor Samer Frangie)

-   Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, Kolkata (Professors Rosinka
    Chaudhuri)

-   Ifriqiyya Colloquium, Columbia University (Professors Manan Ahmed,
    Mahmood Mamdani)

-   Makerere Institute of Social Research, Makerere University, Kampala
    (Professor Mahmood Mamdani)

We have formed a committee of 6, with at least one member from each
participating institution, as an informal brain-storming, steering
committee. Chaired by the PI, this committee shall continue to function
through the course of the project.

**The Changing Context**

The development of higher education in Africa is basically a
post-independence phenomenon. Except in South and North Africa, the
number of universities founded in the colonial period can be counted on
two hands. From one university in the colonial period, to 41 in three
decades after independence, Nigeria has a total of 152 universities.
Similarly, in Ghana, the National Accreditation Board's 2015 report
recognised 77 Universities, 16 of which were public universities. East
Africa had a single institution of higher learning, Makerere, during the
colonial period. Today, it has almost a hundred. Having a national
university was considered as much a hallmark of national independence as
having a flag, an anthem, a central bank and a currency. If Makerere was
the quintessential colonial university, Dar-es-Salaam stood as the
hallmark of nationalist assertion. The fortunes of the African
university dipped with the fiscal crisis of the African state and the
entry of the Bretton Woods institutions, to bail out countries in
financial trouble in return for subjecting their public budgets to a
strict disciplinary regime. In this era of Structural Adjustment, too,
Makerere was the model university.

The World Bank took hold of Makerere's planning in the late 1980s,
around the same time the IMF took charge of the Ugandan treasury. The
Bank's proposed a three-fold reform premised on the assumption that
higher education is a private good. First, it argued that given that the
benefit from higher education accrues to the individual, that individual
should pay for it by way of fees. Today, nearly 90% of students at
Makerere are fee-paying. Second, the Bank argued that the university
should be run by autonomous departments and not by a centralized
administration. This was done by a simple formula: by requiring that 80%
of student fees should go to the student's disciplinary department or
faculty, the Bank managed to starve the central administration of funds.
Third, the Bank said that the curriculum should be revised and made
market-friendly and more professional. To give two examples of the
changes ushered in at this time: the Department of Geography began to
offer a B.A. in Tourism; and the Institute of Linguistics began offering
a B.A. in Secretarial Studies whereby a student would be equipped with
secretarial skills in more than one language.

The Makerere model was exported to other universities in the region and
around the continent over the next decade. In Nigeria, user-fees were
introduced (in 1998) for education and health services. In Ghana, the
"Akosombo Accord," adopted in 1997 introduced a cost-sharing measure
that put tertiary institutions under pressure to contribute 'internally
generated revenues' to fund their own programmes, and on students to pay
Academic Facilities User Fees (AUF) and Residential Facilities User
Fees. Neoliberalism further deepened the alienation of African
universities and academics from African societies that was the result of
the colonial antecedents of those African universities whose histories
lay in the colonial project, and whose practices and curricula
contradicted the nationalist commitment to nation-building and
development of postcolonial Africa. It also deepened the construction of
universities as conservative spaces where heterodox ideas and student
activism were either not encouraged or actively squeezed out by direct
confrontations with authoritarian governments and/or compliant
university leaders. At different times, Ghana and Nigeria experienced
such developments. Decades on, student spaces are currently dominated by
religious and ethnic activism and a focus on school fees and teaching
deficits. In the last few years though, there have been stirrings within
student movements that have raised fundamental questions about tertiary
education.

The developments in South Africa, that fees were rising around the same
time as 'independence' -- transition to majority rule -- resonated with
those around the continent. And it was no surprise that an expanded
entry of black students into 'white' universities was followed by an
expanded exit of more and more of the same students: either they were
unable to keep up payments or they found it hard to get to grips with
the disciplines in which they were enrolled. As these students looked
for ways to explain their predicament, the only answers they could find
seemed to lie in rising fees and a curriculum that bore little
relationship to their life experiences, or family and community
histories. The 'Rhodes must Fall' and the 'Fees Must Fall' movements in
South Africa have engaged with topics which are of general interest to
universities across Africa- questions such as the purpose of education,
the institutional and intellectual cultures of Universities, the
curriculum and the racial and gender composition of faculty and student
body of educational institutions. To understand the changing face of the
Humanities, this study will offer an opportunity for a comparative
reflection on different regional responses in the broader context of the
changing landscape of higher education.

**The Problem**

The intellectual in a post-colony has necessarily to straddle two
locations, one as a scholar and the other as a public intellectual. The
scholar is a member of the global community of scholars; the public
intellectual is engaged with issues that concern the public, usually
local or national. If the former tends to avail of a scholarly
discourse, the latter combines this discourse with a measure of social
activism. A product of the modern university, the distinction between
the scholar and the public intellectual has been repeatedly challenged
in various contexts. We have seen that in East Africa, this distinction
was at the heart of several debates, in particular those carried out in
the literary/political magazine Transition in the sixties, and that
between Ali Mazrui of Makerere University and Walter Rodney of the
University of Dar es Salaam in the late sixties and early seventies. In
Ghana, these questions came to the fore with the Kwame Nkrumah's
intervention in higher education: what should be the purpose of a
university in an independent African country? What should be the object
of African Studies in an African university? During the leftist moment
of the sixties in the Arab world, both scholars and public intellectuals
crossed over this moment. In the contemporary period, these questions
have been evoked with the inclusion of research into artistic practices.
In the South Asian academy, the question has been raised most
productively by the Subaltern Studies School. The challenge in a
post-colony is to link the epistemological to the political.

With this background in mind, we propose a comparative reflection,
research and writing project that will focus on a series of themes while
being sensitive to the difference in regional and temporal contexts. Our
overall objective is to explore colonization and decolonization as a
*frame* for critical theory and historical research. This would mean not
thinking of knowledge as some kind of stable formation on long
historical periods but as critical thought that comes out of reflection
over historical turning points -- such as colonization and
decolonization -- that create space for the encounter of historically
different modes of thinking. We shall seek to study critical events in
different regional and national contexts. By 'critical' developments we
mean developments during which the coming together of different ways of
thought may be open to observation and debate.

Though our central focus will be the colonial and the anti- and
post-colonial, we shall be concerned to rethink the premodern from this
vantage point, not necessarily as precursor to the colonial, nor as a
particular against a universal modern, but as a historical resource for
(an)other universalism(s). To take one example, recent scholarship on
the Indian Ocean is beginning to think of Vasco de Gama's voyages at the
end of the 15^th^ century as having a dual consequence: practically,
cutting off links that constituted precolonial Indian Ocean trade, but
also restructuring the imagination by expunging the historical memory of
these routes. The scholarship that is growing around the official
Chinese initiative called 'One Belt One Road' is refreshing that memory
as a resource for the present and the future. In the Arab world, 1948
and 1967 appear as major turning points for a rethinking of this
history. To take another example, the conventional periodization of
South and Southeast Asian history into the pre-modern and the modern,
with the advent of European colonial rule providing the dividing line,
has been complicated by recent historians by the use of the concept of
the Early Modern which, in different fields such as statecraft, economy,
literature and art, has produced very different chronologies and
trajectories of change marking the emergence of something significantly
new both before and after colonialism. To take a third example, the
comparative study of premodern and modern trans-African slaveries in a
research network jointly established by the Ifriqiyya Colloquium at
Columbia University and the Makerere Institute of Social Research raises
questions about the prevailing tendency to think premodern slaveries
through lenses forged during the study of modern, trans-Atlantic
plantation slavery. This study raises larger questions about the
relationship between slavery and state formation in the premodern
context.

Within this larger historical re-think, we shall identify two particular
*themes* for reflection, research and writing. Admittedly, these themes
are very broad. We arrived at them after discussion among the five
participating institutions. They reflect the range of interests that
animate the researchers and doctoral students at our institutions. Our
objective is not to address the themes comprehensively but to define two
umbrella themes under which doctoral and post-doctoral students will be
encouraged to pursue initiatives.

It will be the purpose of the Institutes and Workshops to introduce
participants to the relevant literature and debates on decolonization
generally and the two themes specifically. The goal would be to guide
each participant to adapt their existing or intended research project to
address questions raised in the course of each workshop. In contrast,
the Institutes will be designed to focus on the research projects
prepared by each participant. It is those who go through the workshops
and whose proposals are critically shaped by institutes who will
comprise the research team.

**The University and the Disciplines**: The colonial and
post-independence histories of the universities have varied trajectories
in the postcolonial world. We shall study specific countries, their
universities and the attempts to decolonize or nationalize the
humanities and social science disciplines. This attempt is marked by two
sets of debates: historically, the first is born of the nationalist
critique of colonial knowledge forms; out of this is born a subset of
debates about what constitutes national knowledge. The second set of
debates have developed around two separate but related discussions: one
a discussion on inter-disciplinarity that raised questions about
disciplinary nationalisms, and the second a specifically post-colonial
discussion on the relationship of the university to the post-colonial
state. Key amongst these was the university and country-wide academic
conference on 'relevance of higher education in a socialist Tanzania,'
one that followed the Arusha Declaration of 1967, declaring the
country's goal as one of developing 'socialism.' This conference led to
a protracted debate on disciplinary vs inter-disciplinary education and
the call for a 'continuous' process of curriculum reform.

Earlier debates in the colonial period that juxtaposed 'excellence' to
'relevance' in the context of the relevance of higher education for
national emancipation gave way to post-colonial debates around the
'relevance' of higher education to 'development,' given that the
university remained deeply embedded within a developing economy and
state that required modern skills for new occupations and expansive
networks created by modern technologies. The specific forms of the
critique of colonial knowledge differed from country to country and
region to region. For example, the close association in Africa of the
discipline of anthropology with colonial officials and missionaries led
to the virtual disappearance of that discipline from African
universities after independence, whereas in India an entire discipline
of Indian anthropology was created to deal with the supposedly unique
institution of caste in the context of equal citizenship in the new
republic.

One debate very important to study in the Arab world pertains to the
question of the Arabization of knowledge, which did not only imply a
linguistic translation, but also opened the way for a conceptual
translation, associated mostly with the nationalist and Marxist
frameworks, dominant in the fifties and sixties. It is out of this
question that the critique of Orientalism, that preceded Said's 1978
book, emerged. And it is one that was related to the question of the
historiography of the Arab world, and the stakes of a non-colonial
history. Another, albeit more local, example has to do with the
emergence of public universities, for instance in Lebanon in the late
fifties. The entry of a public university in a field dominated by two
universities established by French and American missionaries in the
19^th^ century, led to a debate on the meaning of public university, the
question of the language of instruction, the issue of translation, and
again in a moment of leftist ascendancy. In a similar moment,
non-academic spaces of intellectual production, around political
parties, magazines or intellectual figures, were proliferating.

Tracing this history until the present, we can see the demise of the
public university and the multiplication of private universities
providing services in exchange for high fees, in line with the
neo-liberalization of the academic field. This tendency can be observed
across the several regions that will be of interest to our study. In the
Arab world, we see a renewed proliferation of non-academic spaces of
intellectual production, especially around art institutions. The whole
question of translation and Arabization has been taken over by the
emergence of gulf based universities that are now acting as the funder
of a large swath of academic and intellectual production.

University education in the post-colonial world has exploded since
independence. In 1947, undivided India had a total of 20 universities;
today, the three countries have nearly a thousand public and private
universities. In the early sixties, Nigeria (which is home to a quarter
of the African population) had one university with 1,000 students; three
decades later, it had 41 universities with 131,000 students. Similar
figures can be cited for East Africa which too had a single university
at independence, Makerere University. Along these lines, we shall study
the logic behind Nkrumah's initiative to establish an Institute of
African Studies in Ghana, or the establishment of the University of
Dar-es-Salaam at independence, or the establishment of Jawaharlal Nehru
University in India as an institution of advanced social science
research and training for the first postcolonial generation. At the same
time, we intend to study how premodern institutions of learning were
restructured and rethought under the influence of the discipline-driven,
fee-paying, diploma-issuing, gated, modern Western university. One among
these will be a study of al-Azhar in Cairo.

A key discipline in the modern university has been that of history. In
the post-colonial university, this has presented two research challenges
in the study of modes of history-writing with a focus on (a) mythical
narratives of origin that have shaped individual cultures, and (b) the
articulation of modernity with local histories from a conceptual
perspective. The discipline of history has come under considerable
stress in the post-colonial university for several reasons. First, the
very framing of the modern European discipline of history as primarily
the history of nations and the denial of the consciousness of nationhood
to the colonized peoples led to the search for nationalist histories in
colonial and postcolonial countries. However, in each country, there
were often contending versions of nationalist history, reflecting
unequal relations of power within society. These disputes were reflected
as methodological debates within the historical discipline over the
critical evaluation of sources, the establishment of archives, the use
of mythical or legendary narratives, the relative value of textual as
against oral accounts, etc. Second, even though professional historians
located in the university have tried to stamp their authority over the
writing of national history, the production of historical narratives has
proliferated outside the university. This has forced historians to
intervene in public debates where the protocols are not necessarily
under their control. Third, since universities in most postcolonial
countries are heavily dependent on government funding, history
departments in universities often become embroiled in political
controversies over curriculum, textbooks and research priorities,
leading to serious erosion of the academic autonomy of the university.
Once again, the situation is not necessarily the same in every region.
In some cases, as in India, the study of history has both expanded and
become more contentious; in other contexts, like in Africa, both
governments and international donors have tended to devalue the study of
history from a 'developmental' perspective: the overwhelming tendency
has been to fold the study of history into newly established departments
of 'development studies.' Hence, a comparative study of the history
discipline in three or four countries will be extremely instructive.

**Language, Nation and the University**: We begin with the question of
the relation between the colonial language (English, French, Portuguese)
and local languages, of the standardization of particular dialects as
languages in the course of state construction and/or missionary efforts
at conversion, both as a way to reflect on the relationship between
decolonization and multilingualism. In this context, we shall examine
the relation between literacy and orality, folklore and canonical
literature, standard language and dialects, rooted languages and lingua
franca. A comparative study of Kiswahili, Urdu and Afrikaans that
reflects on history and identity in the context of pre-colonialism and
colonialism will be fascinating. A study of the development of Afrikaans
during apartheid from a folkloric language in the colonial period to a
language of high culture, politics, administration and intellectual
discourse -- and the relative success/failure of Swahili to follow that
same path -- will be instructive.

We have already mentioned the importance of studying the question of the
Arabization of knowledge from the vantage point of decolonization. It
opens on other questions, such as the relationship between the Arabic
language and nationalist (and even religious) ideology. Kurdish, Berber
and francophone literature has been some of its victims, with the latter
the question of colonialism being more prominent. The varied examples of
India, Pakistan and Bangladesh -- three South Asian countries -- in
managing multiple languages with instruction and research in the
universities are striking. While colonial higher education was carried
out in English, universities such as Madras, Calcutta, Bombay,
Allahabad, Banaras or Lahore were closely tied to the standardization of
modern Indian print languages such as Tamil, Bengali, Marathi, Gujarati,
Hindi and Urdu. After independence, the spread of higher education has
been accompanied by a stratification of higher education. At the upper
end, elite universities, both public and private, foster advanced
research and post-graduate education in English and seek to maintain
close links with global academic networks. Lower down the scale,
undergraduate as well as post-graduate education is provided in the
regional languages in order to supply school and college teachers,
regional bureaucrats, lawyers and journalists, and a large mass of young
people seeking upward mobility and social respectability. The
stratification of the universities is tied to the social and political
process of democratization as well as changing relations of power. This
phenomenon will comprise a significant component of our project.

II. **Process and Activities **

The project will develop around to types of activities, each with a
different focus. *Workshops and training institutes* will be designed
with an eye on the needs of doctoral students. Their disciplinary
orientation reflects a pedagogical intention. *Symposia* are designed to
bring together participating faculty. We shall have a preparatory
symposium (Year 1), three workshops and institutes (Years 2, 3, and 4),
and a concluding Symposium (Year 5). If finances permit, we shall seek
to have another symposium in Year 3.

**Preparatory Conference (2019)**: The preparatory conference will take
place in Kampala in March-April 2019. Each member of the consortium will
present an individual program that will take the *focus and themes*
paper as the starting point and propose an institution-specific program
of research.

**Workshops and Institutes** (2020, 2021, 2022): We shall hold three
sets of workshops and institutes on three different disciplinary themes:
the Historical Method (2020), cultural studies (2021) and Political
Theory (2022). Though disciplinary in focus, each workshop will be
designed set in a wider inter-disciplinary context that highlights the
central challenge of the project: decolonization.

Training Workshops will take place in three different places. Each
workshop will include 3 to 5 students from each participating
institution and a total of 3-5 seminar leaders / lecturers drawn from
different institutions. A further three global scholars will be invited
after we have a clear idea of the interests of the students coming to
the workshop. This group of around 20-25 persons will meet over three
days. Out of the Training Workshop will be selected a cohort of 10
persons who will come together for an Institute of 5-7 days. They will
be joined by three scholars of global standing. Training Workshops will
focus more on lectures and instruction; Institutes will be more
participatory. Participants will (a) present own work, (b) do collective
readings for reading seminars, (c) participate in roundtables on
particular topics, including pedagogical discussions for people who seek
to make programmatic statements. There will be cultural activities and
site visits between seminars and lectures, and evening walks with
discussions.

Workshops will be held in different locations. All Institutes will take
place in Kampala, unless individual partner institutions volunteer to
shoulder the responsibility of hosting an institute. Partners will cover
some of the local costs.

**Research**: There will be research funding for students and faculty
selected for the Institute on each theme. The students will be
registered at four of the five collaborating institutions (all except
Columbia University). They will be located in Kampala, Legon, Beirut and
Kolkata. They will be registered in five-year doctoral programs. This
application seeks funding for only the three-year research component for
each student. We aim to secure full funding for all five years for each
student. The reason we did not include full funding in this project
application is because of the sense that it might inflate the final
budget and compromise the entire project.

**Year 5 Symposium (2023)**: Research funding will be for five years for
doctoral students and four years for faculty. It will commit the
recipient to produce a publishable paper for presentation at the Year 5
Symposium. A working draft will be presented at the Year 3 symposium
should it be held. Doctoral students at the participating institutions
are usually on a five year cycle, out of which two to three years are
committed to research. We would like to ensure the three year research
funding to every student and then look for funding for the remaining two
years, hopefully from Mellon, if not from other donors.

The five members of this initiative commit themselves to this project on
the basis of a shared perspective summed up in the paper titled *focus
and themes*. The research will develop on the basis of loosely connected
but separately run research programs. Student researchers will benefit
from a joint training and reflection process which will comprise the
above mentioned Training Workshops and Institutes. Each institutional
participant will present a set of initial research statements at the
Preparatory Conference in Year 1 (2019), a progress report at the Year 3
Symposium and the results of the research will be presented at the Year
5 Symposium (2023). We shall invite four scholars with global standing
to act as discussants at each Symposium.

**Publications**: A selection of individual papers will be published in
*The MISR Review* (or other institutionally-based journals) and the
final set of papers will be published in three edited and thematically
organized books. Participating institutions will at the Preparatory
Conference in Year 1 brainstorm the possibility of a more popular
literary/political publication, modelled after the hybrid
magazine/journal *Transition* published in Kampala in the 1960s.

**What will Success Look Like?** We have two responses to this question:
one is immediate, from the point of view of all collaborating
institutions, and thus the project as a whole; the other is over the
medium run, from the point of the view of the lead institution, MISR.
Immediately, success would be measured in publications, training
outputs, and the development of research networks leading, hopefully, to
more exciting collaborative work in the future, exploiting the
connections made in these five years. For the lead institution, Makerere
Institute of Social Research, the intermediate goal is to develop an
Inter-Disciplinary Centre for Decolonization Studies as an institutional
base from which to deepen the research program and further develop the
international collaboration initiated by this project.
